2138 IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2023 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Ajeenkya DY Patil School of Engineering. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 09:35:15 UTC f rom IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 
 
 
 
 
Spatio-Temporal Clustering of Multi-Location 
Time Series to Model Seasonal 
Influenza Spread 
Hootan Kamran  , Member, IEEE, Dionne M. Aleman  , Member, IEEE, 
Michael W. Carter  , and Kieran M. Moore  
 
 
Abstract—Although seasonal influenza disease spread 
is a spatio-temporal phenomenon, public surveillance sys- 
tems aggregate data only spatially, and are rarely predic - 
tive. We develop a hierarchical clustering -based machine 
learning tool to anticipate flu spread patterns based on his- 
torical spatio-temporal flu activity, where we use historical 
influenza-related emergency department records as a proxy 
for flu prevalence. This analysis replaces conventional ge- 
ographical hospital clustering with clusters based on both 
spatial and temporal distance between hospital flu peaks 
to generate a network illustrating whether flu spreads be - 
tween pairs of clusters (direction) and how long that spread 
takes (magnitude). To overcome data sparsity, we take a 
model-free approach, treating hospital clusters as a fully - 
connected network, where arcs indicate flu transmission. 
We perform predictive analysis on the clusters’ time series 
of flu ED visits to determine direction and magnitude of  
flu travel. Detection of recurrent spatio -temporal patterns 
may help policymakers and hospitals better prepare for 
outbreaks. We apply this tool to Ontario, Canada using a 
five-year historical dataset of daily flu-related ED visits, and 
find that in addition to expected flu spread between major 
cities/airport regions, we were able to illuminate previously 
unsuspected patterns of flu spread between non -major 
cities, providing new insights for public health officials. We 
showed that while a spatial clustering outperforms a tem - 
poral clustering in terms of the direction of the spread (81% 
spatial v. 71% temporal), the opposite is true in terms of the 
magnitude of the time lag (20% spatial v. 70% temporal). 
Index Terms —Clustering, influenza, spatial, spatiotem - 
poral, surveillance, temporal. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
NFLUENZA causes 3–5 million severe illnesses and 
250,000–500,000 deaths globally each year [1]. It is among 
the 10 leading causes of death in the US [2] and Canada [3], 
with hundreds of deaths and hundreds of thousands of heath 
 
Manuscript received 26 August 2022; revised 4 December 2022; ac- 
cepted 29 December 2022. Date of publication 6 January 2023; date of 
current version 5 April 2023. (Corresponding author: Hootan Kamran.) 
Hootan Kamran, Dionne M. Aleman, and Michael W. Carter 
are with the Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineer- 
ing, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G8, Canada (e- 
mail: hootan@mie.utoronto.ca; aleman@mie.utoronto.ca; carter@mie. 
utoronto.ca). 
Kieran M. Moore is with the KFL&A Public Health Informatics, 
Kingston, ON K7M 1V5, Canada (e-mail: kieran.moore@kflaph.ca). 
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JBHI.2023.3234818 
care utilization episodes in Ontario each year [4]. The influenza 
virus undergoes antigenic shifts (sudden changes) and drifts 
(gradual changes), which make permanent immunity through 
vaccination an elusive solution [5], with vaccine effectiveness 
averaging below 50% in the previous 10 years [6], and signify 
the importance of surveillance systems. Moreover, contagious 
diseases pose epidemic and pandemic risks with lower proba - 
bility, but with much larger impact, than seasonal influenza [7], 
as recently observed during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
To formulate national and provincial level health system 
responses to surveillance data, temporal data coming from mul- 
tiple spatial sources must be aggregated for abstraction. Most 
current public surveillance systems gather temporal disease data 
from multiple sources, e.g., daily flu activity at multiple hospi- 
tals’ emergency departments, then pool data coming from near 
hospitals into regional data, and analyze the pooled data individ- 
ually for each region. Instead, we introduce a spatio -temporal 
aggregation scheme founded on the philosophy that space and 
time are interwoven [8], and spatio -temporally recorded data 
may, based on the objective, be better aggregated temporally 
or spatially. Our approach allows for the extraction of recurrent 
inter-cluster spatio-temporal patterns by modelling flu correla- 
tions as a network of inter-connected hospital clusters. 
Surveillance systems collect, analyze, and interpret specific 
health data to detect disease spread patterns and, through inter- 
vention, minimize the future harm caused by the outbreaks [9]. 
Quantitative surveillance in the literature generally involves the 
analysis of disease time series. These time series are successive 
measurements of the disease prevalence in time. Pioneered by 
France in 1984 [10], computerized surveillance systems have 
since been implemented in many other developed countries to 
monitor the spread of communicable diseases. 
The Influenza Division at the Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention in the US, for example, monitors the spread of flu on 
an ongoing basis and publishes the weekly FluView reports [11]. 
Similarly, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) pre - 
pares FluWatch, also a weekly influenza surveillance report that 
gathers data from a national network of participating labs, hos- 
pitals, doctor’s offices and provincial and territorial ministries 
of health and provides an overview of flu activity for each 
province [12]. 
At the provincial level in Canada, public health agencies 
provide province-wide surveillance. For example, Ontario’s 
2168-2194 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information. 
I 
KAMRAN et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL CLUSTERING OF MULTI-LOCATION TIME SERIES TO MODEL SEASONAL INFLUENZA SPREAD 2139 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Ajeenkya DY Patil School of Engineering. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 09:35:15 UTC f rom IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 
 
 
 
ILIMapper [13] pools data from nearby hospitals regardless of 
their temporal similarities. Normal activity thresholds are then 
manually set by experience for each individual region regardless 
of inter-regional correlations, and activity levels beyond those 
thresholds are considered as outbreak in that region. However, 
flu activity at a particular time and location may depend not 
only on the previous measurements at that location, but also  
on the previous measurements at some other locations, such  
as neighbouring cities, or even non -neighbouring cities that  
are connected by population movement through, for example, 
airports [14] or other contact networks [15]. 
When reliable information about both the space and the time 
of certain events are available (e.g., positive flu cases recorded 
on certain days at certain hospitals), it is suboptimal to design 
a surveillance system that adopts only spatial distances. In fact, 
we show that spatial and temporal aggregation can each be 
more predictive than the other depending on the variable being 
predicted. The methodologies presented here, although designed 
for a flu surveillance system, are not limited to epidemeology, 
and may improve the analysis of other spatio-temporal systems 
such as in immunology [16], meteorology [17], and palaeoan- 
thropology [18]. 
Traditionally, regression and time series models are used in 
the statistical surveillance literature, the latter being more suit- 
able for explicit modelling of temporal correlations (e.g., auto- 
correlation [19], and seasonalities [20]). Such single -variate 
methods for time series analysis, however, are designed for in- 
dividual time series, and cannot model the interactions between 
time series from multiple locations. There are many statistical 
surveillance systems [21], but we discuss here only the methods 
that are capable of multi-variate spatio-temporal analysis. 
Shewhart control charts [22] use historical data to estimate 
statistical norms and raise a flag whenever a measurement of  
a variable falls outside its historical norms. The variable can  
be activity levels within a certain spatio -temporal frame. For 
example, if flu activity in a certain week at a certain location is 
higher than its historical norms, it is an indication of an outbreak 
in that particular spatio-temporal frame. 
More sophisticated methods such as cumulative sums [23], 
exponentially-weighted moving average [24], and scan statis - 
tics [25] have been developed to allow for spatio -temporal 
aggregation in control charts. The basic assumption in such 
methods is that events happened at the same time in farther 
locations, and at the same location at earlier times are weighted 
less than the events that happened closer to the spatio-temporal 
reference point. But by aggregating the distribution of events 
into a single number to be used in control charts, these methods 
neglect temporal correlations between pairs of time series. 
While standard control charts consider current values of the 
statistics independently from their previous values, an underly- 
ing stochastic structure may be assumed using Markovian mod- 
els to estimate the probabilities of a system transitioning from 
one state to another state (e.g., non-outbreak to outbreak). Hid- 
den Markov models (HMMs), for example, define a probability 
distribution over sequences of observations by invoking another 
sequence of latent (hidden) variables. The key assumptions are 
that the hidden variables have the Markov property, and that 
the observed variable at any time depends only on the hidden 
variable at that time. Unobserved process is in one of the two 
states: outbreak, and non-outbreak [26]. Prior probabilities can 
then be incorporated using a Bayesian approach [27]. 
An HMM with more than one time series is called a multi - 
variate hidden Markov model (MHMM). Standard MHMMs 
assume that the multiple variates are independent [28]. Pre - 
conceived notions of spread patterns may be modelled with 
correlated latent variables between, for example, airports [14]. 
However, if those notions do not exist or must be further va - 
lidified, a mechanism is needed to extract them from historical 
data. 
We therefore introduce a spatio-temporal clustering method 
to replace the conventional geographic regions. Data clustering 
is a machine learning task that systematically partitions objects 
into a set of groups (called clusters) such that objects within 
a cluster are similar, and objects from different clusters are 
dissimilar [29]. The notion of similarity in data clustering is 
essentially linked to the notion of distance. Our model uses a 
set of predefined temporal distance measures, as well as the 
spatial distance measure, and finds the one that best serves 
each surveillance objective. By extracting recurrent inter-cluster 
spatio-temporal patterns in a network of hospital clusters, the 
introduced methodologies address the two limitations of current 
surveillance systems: (1) purely spatial or purely temporal ag - 
gregation of spatio-temporal data, and (2) implicit assumption 
of regional independence. 
In current surveillance systems, regions are defined according 
to geography (local regions, cities, and countries), and surveil- 
lance control limits are calculated for each region using its 
own past data. There are two main contributions in this paper. 
As the first contribution, we consider a network of interacting 
regions instead of individual regions and find their pairwise 
distances based on historical data. The second contribution is the 
definition of pairwise distances for cluster -based aggregation. 
Calculating temporal distances, in addition to the conventional 
spatial distances, allows aggregation by temporal similarities 
between regions that are characteritically similar, but may be 
geographically distant. For example, we found that temporal 
distances are better predictors of directional analysis and that 
areas with major airports usually lead the other regions in 
outbreaks. For the magnitude of the travel time lag, however, 
spatial aggregation yields better predictive power. 
The hidden Markov models are non-parametric models, where 
a hidden space is supposed to yield the probability of out - 
break in the observable states. The temporal aspect has been 
considered as temporal autoregressive terms in the previous 
studies [30], [31], however, the temporal similarities between 
geographic regions are not addressed yet. We explicitly extract 
the empirical network with pairwise distances that are calculated 
spatio-temporally. 
To address the first limitation, we extend the notion of dis - 
tance between a pair of hospitals and include temporal distance 
between their corresponding time series in addition to their Eu- 
clidean distance in space. Despite the rich literature in time series 
distance measures and their applications in mining of sequenced 
data [32], little has been done to incorporate such measures in a 
2140 IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2023 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Ajeenkya DY Patil School of Engineering. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 09:35:15 UTC f rom IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 
 
 
 
spatio-temporal surveillance system. Spatial distance D£ is the 
Euclidean distance between hospitals; Temporal distance Df is 
any member of a predefined set of common time series distance 
measures in the literature (e.g., correlation Df :COR). 
To address the second limitation, i.e., the implicit assumption 
of regional independence, we consider the hospital clusters as a 
fully-connected network, with arcs indicating flu transmission 
between clusters as predicted by the time series. We consider  
two surveillance variables for each cluster pair, direction and 
magnitude of flu travel, to identify in which cluster(s) is a par- 
ticular cluster’s current outbreak preceded, and how long does it 
takes for the outbreak to travel from one cluster to another. We 
showed that depending on which surveillance variable is being 
studied, certain distance measures provide higher prediction 
capabilities than the others. Inter -cluster patterns so -obtained 
help policymakers gain insights into the spatial and temporal 
emergence patterns of outbreaks and produce accurate predic - 
tions of the activities of one cluster given the activities of the 
other clusters. To validate our model, we use daily hospital data 
from 2012–2016 in Ontario, Canada to make predictions about 
the most recent outbreaks in the data. 
TABLE I 
FLU DATA FEATURES 
 
II. DATA 
Various variables may be chosen as the proxy for actual 
disease activity in quantitative surveillance. Newly available 
sources of data from such technologies as Google [33], and 
Twitter [34], [35], albeit helpful, cannot replace health utilization 
and laboratory data [36]. The main source of data in inter - 
national [37], national [38], and provincial [13] surveillance 
systems is still obtained directly from health units. 
We therefore use a flu syndromic hospital dataset. The data 
in this study has been collected from 129 hospitals in Ontario 
during 2004-2016, by our collaborator at KFL&A Public Health 
(Kingston, Ontario). We obtained Research Ethics Board (REB) 
approval from the University of Toronto. The protocol reference 
number is 28839, and the original approval date is 15 April 2013. 
It was renewed annually until study was concluded in 2017. 
ln order to fulfill privacy requirements, the REB required us to 
de-link identifying information, encrypt personally identifiable 
information stored outside of a secure university server, and only 
allow personnel access to data on a need-to-know basis. 
Each record in the dataset includes information about a visit to 
one of the participating hospitals (Table I). When a patient visits 
an emergency department, the triage personnel record the main 
reasons for the visit, including symptoms, diseases, mechanisms 
of injury, etc. This data is called the chief complaints (CCs) and is 
a popular data source in the literature of syndromic surveillances 
due to its availability and timeliness [39]. 
Symptoms are extracted from the chief complaints, and sub- 
sets of symptoms are classified into syndromes, which are  
then used for prognostic purposes. Two 0 -1 valued flu-related 
syndromic variables, respiratory (RESP) and influenza-like ill- 
nesses (ILI), are included in this dataset, and we consider a 
record to be flu -positive if either of these variables are 1. The 
daily flu activity level at a hospital is estimated by the proportion 
of flu-positive visits to that hospital in that day. 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.  Participating hospitals in Ontario. 
 
The original ED dataset was in a comma separated values (csv) 
file of size 1.46 GB with 18,503,184 rows, each representing a 
single visit’s record. Regular expressions were used to handle 
formatting errors in the csv file, mainly missing and invalid 
entries. Invalid entries violated either data type constraints (e.g., 
an alphabetic character for age) or data range constraints (e.g., 
a negative integer for age). 
Missing and invalid entries were allowed in some fields, 
e.g., symptoms. But, syndromic information features are critical 
because they are used to create and cluster the flu time series. 
Thus, rows with invalid syndromatic entries (less than 1% of all 
rows) were removed from the database. We also suppressed the 
text for symptoms of non-flu visits (89% of records) to reduce 
the file size. As a result, the csv file shrank by 35% to 0.94 GB. 
The number of participating hospitals grew from 3 hospitals in 
2004 to 129 hospitals in 2016. We chose the subset of hospitals 
that reported every day for at least the most recent five years 
of data (2012-2016). Thirty hospitals met this condition and 
were selected to be included in the analysis (Fig. 1). We also 
applied other preprocessing treatments to each hospital’s time 
series, including a weekly moving average filter to smooth out 
weekly patterns, and a linear normalization to zero mean and 
unit variance. 
 
III. METHODS 
Let xh denote the daily time series of the proportion of 
flu-positive visits at hospital h ∈ H, where H is the set of  
all hospitals. The geographical notion of “region” in a spatial 

KAMRAN et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL CLUSTERING OF MULTI-LOCATION TIME SERIES TO MODEL SEASONAL INFLUENZA SPREAD 2141 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Ajeenkya DY Patil School of Engineering. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 09:35:15 UTC f rom IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 
 
 
n 
n 
n 
Σ Σ 
hh 
   
hh 
 
hospital aggregation is replaced by “spatio -temporal cluster”  
in our model. The set of all distance measures between pairs of 
hospitals, denoted D, includes a spatial d£ and multiple temporal 
df distance measures. For each distance measure d ∈ D, a  
hierarchical clustering Cd is created. To create clusterings with 
desired numbers of total clusters, then, the hierarchy Cd can be 
cut at n ∈ N to obtain Cd, where N is the set of all numbers 
that is desirable as the total number of clusters; It can reflect 
expectations or needs of public health agencies. Then, the time 
series for each cluster C in each of the clusterings Cd is calculated 
by averaging the time series of the hospitals that belong to that 
cluster. 
We use a fully connected network to model flu travel between 
pairs of those cluster -aggregated time series in each clustering 
(xC, xC′ 
, where C, C′ ∈ Cd). The clustering is then assigned a 
predictiveness score for direction and magnitude of flu travel 
between pairs of its clusters, and the highest-scoring clustering 
will be used to make predictions about the future outbreaks. 
For example, if a certain clustering of cities yields significant 
values of lagged correlations, or low values of residual errors 
with respect to the lag magnitude, they receive a high score. 
 
A. Hospital Clustering 
Hierarchical clustering has been successful in clustering both 
spatial [42] and temporal [43] data, and is therefore chosen 
as the clustering algorithm in this research. Our model is an 
agglomerative bottom up clustering, that starts by putting each 
object in its own cluster. Then, at each step, the nearest two 
clusters are combined into a new higher -level cluster until all 
objects are in one cluster, creating a hierarchy of clusterings 
with different numbers of clusters. 
Let dhh′ denote the distance measured by d ∈ D between 
hospitals h, h′ ∈ H. Then, define dCC′ 
, the distance between 
clusters C and C′ in clustering C as the average of all pairwise 
hospital distances: 
 
      
 
 
 
Fig. 2. An example of hierarchical clustering dendogram cut at differ - 
ent heights. n is the number of clusters. Shapes in the top row and 
shaded areas in the bottom row indicate cluster membership. 
 
 
 
The temporal distance between hospitals h and h′, denoted df ′ , 
is the distance between their corresponding time series. Unlike 
the Euclidean distance for spatial measure, there is no consen - 
sus in the literature on how to measure the temporal distance, 
mainly due to the fact that different measures are designed to 
capture different types of similarity in temporal behaviour such 
as collinearity and shape. 
For example, consider two large cities with similar urban 
characteristics, but a large geographical distance. Although they 
may exhibit similar transmission patterns, in a purely geograph- 
ical aggregation, such cities will not end up in the same cluster. 
Calculation of temporal distances allows for clustering of cities 
with similar spread patterns, and therefore profiling of regions, 
and identification of influential urban characteristics, such as the 
presence of airports, or financial hubs. We compare the performance of spatial clustering with the 
dCC′ =  1  
|C|× |C′| 
h∈C h′ ∈C′ 
dhh′  C, C′ ∈ C, C /= C′ (1) performance of clustering based on five common time series 
distance measures to find the most predictive clustering in terms 
We now briefly present an example of bottom -up hierarchical 
clustering, where clusters are merged iteratively to form bigger 
clusters. The opposite is also possible, and called top -down 
clustering, where larger clusters are iteratively split into smaller 
ones. 
Suppose we want to create a hierarchical clustering for the 
set of points {a, b, c, d, e} with coordinates a = (1, 5), b = 
(2.5, 5), c = (3, 1), d = (3, 2), e = (5, 1). The algorithm iter- 
atively merges closest clusters to form bigger clusters starting 
by merging the closest pair (c, d) into a single cluster. The result- 
ing hierarchy of clusters can be visualized using a dendogram 
whose height represents the average pairwise distance defined in 
Equation 1. The dendogram can then be cut at different heights 
to create clusterings with different sizes (Fig. 2). 
The spatial distance between hospitals h and h′ is denoted d£  and measures the Euclidean distance using their longitude 
of predicting certain surveillance variables. The five time series 
distance measures are dissimilarity based on autocorrelation 
and partial autocorrelation functions df :ACF and df :PACF [44], 
correlation-based distance df :COR [45], dynamic time warping 
df :DTW [46], and Euclidean distance df :EUC. 
We now briefly describe how each of the five common tem- 
poral distance measures (ACF, PACF, COR, DTW, and EUC) 
are calculated for a pair of hospital time series for hospitals h 
and h′, defined as: 
xh = (xh[1] ,...,  xh[T ])  h ∈ H (3) 
xh′ = (xh′ [1] ,...  , xh′ [T ])  h′ ∈ H (4) 
 
The autocorrelation -based distance df :ACF measures the dis- 
tance between estimated autocorrelation functions. Let φˆx = 
hh′ 
and latitude coordinates, denoted XCh and YCh, respectively: 
d£ ′ = 
√
(XCh — XCh′ )2 + (YCh — YCh′ )2  h, h′ ∈ H (2) 
(φˆx[1], . .. , φˆx[ M ]) be the estimated autocorrelation vector of 
x, found by regression [44], for some M such that φˆx[m] ≈ 0 
for m > M . The autocorrelation-based distance between xh and 

2142 IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2023 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Ajeenkya DY Patil School of Engineering. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 09:35:15 UTC f rom IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 
 
 
ij 
d = 
√
2(1 — p(xh, xh′ ))  h, h ∈ H (6) 
hh′ 
αβ αβ αβ 
αβ 
n 
hh′ 
|C| n 
 t=1  
β 
t=α 
xC′ 
[t] — xC′ 
(0) 
2 
dhh′ = (xh[t] — xh′ [t]) 
t=1 C 1 
 
xh′ is are used in modelling inter-cluster flu movement, are defined as 
df :ACF = 
q
(φˆ — φˆ )T(φˆ — φˆ ) h, h′ ∈ H xC =  1  Σ 
x C ∈ Cd, n ∈ N, d ∈ D (10) 
and measures how similarly the two time series regress to  
their previous values. The partial autocorrelation-based distance 
df :PACF is similarly calculated, but instead, based on the partial 
autocorrelation coefficients that are obtained by removing the 
dependencies on intermediate lag values. 
The correlation-based distance df :COR is calculated using the 
Pearson correlation coefficient: ΣT  (xh[t] — xh)(xh′ [t] — xh′ ) 
 
 
B. Flu Movement 
From an infectious disease epidemeology point of view, we 
hypothesize that there are established population and geography 
factors that may affect the spread patterns in a certain way  
that is recurrent from outbreak to outbreak. Note that in this 
work, we do not distinguish between dominant strains and A/B 
types, therefore, the findings are not specific to certain out- 
p(xh, xh′ ) = qΣ T 
t=1 (xh[t] — xh′ )2 T 
t=1 (xh′ [t] — xh′ )2 
h, h′ ∈ H 
(5) 
break behaviours. Learning such patterns can help policymakers 
make informed resource management decisions to contain the 
outbreak more efficiently. For example, the knowledge that 
cluster C usually peaks a few days earlier than cluster C′ gives 
policymakers a few days advanced notice for planning in C′ as 
where xh is the average value of xh. Recall that we normalized 
the series such that they have a mean of zero; therefore xh = 0 
for h ∈ H. Correlation-based distance df :COR is then calculated 
as follows: 
f :COR ′ 
hh′ 
Dynamic time warping finds a mapping between xh and 
xh′ such that a specific distance measure between the coupled 
observations is minimized. The minimum distance is denoted 
df :DTW and is given by 
soon as an outbreak starts in C. We therefore investigate two 
questions for each cluster pair. The first question involves the 
direction of flu travel: Which cluster precedes the other in the 
outbreak? The second question involves the magnitude: How 
many days does it take for the outbreak to travel from one cluster 
to another? 
To answer these questions, we first manually extract the 
outbreak days from the cluster -aggregated time series to keep 
the focus away from no-risk days. Seasonal flu, albeit variable 
in timing and duration, often starts as early as October and 
df :DTW = min 
Σ 
|xh[ak] — xh′ [bk]| h, h′ ∈ H can last as late as April with outbreaks between December and February [47]. For years with multiple outbreaks, each one is 
(ak,bk )∈Rhh′ 
k=1,...,τ 
(7) isolated and treated separately. Consider the full time series x = {x[1],...  , x[T ]}. Since the 
where Rhh′ is the set of all warping paths (ak, bk), k ∈ 
{1 . . . , τ } between xh and xh′ that satisfy three conditions: 
  
data outside of October of each year and April of the next year is 
irrelevant, we set October 1st as index t = 1, and April 31st as 
index t = T , that is 212. For an isolated outbreak o ∈ O, let αo 
Rhh′ = (ak, bk), k ∈ {1 . . . , τ }|  ak, bk ∈ {1,...,T  }, 
a1, b1 = 1, aτ , bτ = T, 
(ak — ak—1, bk — bk—1) ∈ {(1, 0), (0, 1), (1, 1)}
  
and βo, extracted from the average time series, denote the start 
and end dates, respectively. Note that the outbreak starts and ends 
between October 1st and April 31st, that is, 1 < α < β < T . 
Then, for the cluster pair C, C′ ∈ C, the lagged cross correlation 
is defined as 
(8) 
The first condition ensures that (a ,b  ) is a mapping between 
 
ρCC′ 
(l) =  
 Σβ   
xC[t + l] — xC (l) 
 
 
xC′ 
[t] — xC′ 
(0)
 ! 
k  k t=α 
xh and xh′ both with length T . The second condition ensures  rΣ that we use all of the information in both sequences. The third 
condition allows the index of one sequence to be stopped while 
the other continues, which also implies that we cannot go back 
β 
× 
t=α 
rΣ   
xC [t + l] — xC′ 
(l) 
2 
  
!—1 
 
 
 
 
or compressed, their DTW distance remains small. Finally, the Euclidean distance df :EUC is calculated as 
 
 where 
C l ∈ {—L,.. .,  +L} (11) 
 
 
f :EUC 
rΣT 2 
xαβ (l) is the average of the lagged values 
Σ 
  
 
 
distance measure d ∈ D, hierarchical clusterings Cd are found 
for n = 1, . . . , N , and cluster-aggregated time series xC, which 
and L is the maximum suggested lag. We now use the values of 
ρ to identify the travel direction and distance magnitude. 
h∈C 
αβ 
xαβ (l) = β — α +1  t=α 
x 
β 
xh xh′ xh xh′ h 
in time (ak and bk are monotonically increasing). DTW recog- 
nizes similarly-shaped time series in the presence of shifting or 
scaling, i.e., when two similarly-shaped time series are stretched 
(9) C 
Once the distance matrix for hospital pairs is calculated for each 
[t + l] (12) 
qΣ 
KAMRAN et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL CLUSTERING OF MULTI-LOCATION TIME SERIES TO MODEL SEASONAL INFLUENZA SPREAD 2143 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Ajeenkya DY Patil School of Engineering. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 09:35:15 UTC f rom IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 
 
 
n 
CC′ CC′ 
o 
o 
⎞ 
n 
Σ 
o 
α β 
o 
d 
n∗ 
n 
o A∈{—L,...,L} αoβo 
|O| o 
. 
(13) 
 
Magnitude: To extract recurrent lag magnitudes between 
cluster pairs, we consider all clusterings Cd for d ∈ D and 
n ∈ N for aggregation, and choose the one whose inter-cluster 
magnitudes are least variant. That is, the clustering between 
cluster pairs in which flu travels least variantly in terms of the 
magnitude. 
To measure the variance of magnitude for clustering C, we 
first extract the lag by which the two time series most highly 
correlate as follows: 
 
l = arg max ρ (l)     o ∈ O,  C, C′ ∈ C,  C  =/ C′ 
 
A small value for lCC′ 
indicates that it took a short time for 
outbreak o to travel between C and C′, and a large value means 
the reverse. 
Lower variance in the values of lCC′ 
, o ∈ O means more 
consistent distance magnitudes from outbreak to outbreak, hence 
less uncertain future predictions. The average magnitude score is 
the reciprocal of the average of pairwise yearly variances (lower 
variances are represented by higher scores): 
, 
1 Σ 
 
1 Σ 
CC′ 
—1 
CC′ 2.  
smag(d, n) = ⎝ n  
 
 
 
C,C′∈Cd 
C/=C′ 
 
|O| 
 
o∈O 
lo — l ⎠ 
(14) 
 
Fig. 3.  An example of finding the lag moment and optimal lag for a pair 
of time series. 
where 
CC′ 
is the average of lag magnitudes across all outbreaks, 
defined as  
 
CC′ 
l = 
 
 1  
|O| o∈O 
 
lCC′ 
(15) 
where ρCC′ 
(l) is defined in (11). The more moment accumu- 
o o 
lates on either side of the positive lags or the negative lags, 
the stronger directionality can be inferred. A negative value 
for mCC′ 
indicates that negatively-lagged xC′ 
(starts earlier) o correlates more highly with xC o than positively-lagged, and 
Among the clusterings with different sizes based on different 
distance measures, the one that achieves the highest magnitude 
score will be used for magnitude prediction: 
o 
therefore outbreak o in cluster C precedes C′ (Fig. 3). A positive 
mCC′ 
means the reverse. Note that, because of the momentum, 
the higher-magnitude lags achieve high ρ values, the higher the 
∗ 
mag 
∗ 
mag ) = arg max (smag(d, n)) (16) 
d∈D 
n∈N 
magnitude of lag moment function will be, indicating stronger 
directionality. 
The moments from multiple outbreaks o ∈ O are then aver- 
∗ 
For brevity, let C∗(mag) denote C 
mag 
as the winning clustering. mag 
For any given cluster pair C, C′ ∈ C∗(mag), future magnitude 
aged, and the average’s absolute value represents the strength of 
directionality between that pair. The average of directionalities 
of all pairs is then the direction score: is predicted as CC′ l 
Direction: To extract recurrent directions between cluster 
pairs, we consider all clusterings Cd for d ∈ D and n ∈ N for 
1 
 
sdir(d, n) =  n  
 
 
C,
Σ
C′∈Cd  mCC′
  d ∈ D, n ∈ N (18) 
aggregation, and choose the pair whose inter-cluster direction- 
alities are most significantly consistent. The start  and end date 
of each outbreak o ∈ O are denoted αo, βo and are identified 
by isolating the peaks from the average time series from all 
C/=C′ 
where where mCC′ 
is the average of moments across all out- 
breaks: 
hospitals. Each outbreak, once isolated, has then the same length 
 
mCC′ =  1  Σ 
mCC′ 
 
 
 
(19) 
lagged cross-correlation function between each pair C, C′ ∈C  
to measure directionality between the pair: 
Among the clusterings with different sizes based on different 
distance measures, the one that achieves the highest direction 
score is the most suitable to be used for direction prediction: 
mCC′ = 
Σ l × ρCC′ 
(l) (17) (d∗ , n∗ ) = arg max (s (d, n)) (20) 
o 
A=—L 
αoβo dir dir d∈D 
n∈N 
dir 
2 
2 
βo — αo +1  for all hospitals. 
Consider outbreak o ∈ O. We use the first moment of the o∈O 
(d , n 
n 
L 
l 
. 
2144 IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2023 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Ajeenkya DY Patil School of Engineering. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 09:35:15 UTC f rom IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 
 
 
n 
n∗ dir 
Z = l 5 
 5  
Σ
C,C  ∈C 
5 
7 
5 
5 
7 
1 if 1 Σ 
o 
5 2 
6 o 7 
5 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Fig. 4.  The direction and magnitude scores for different clusterings Cd. 
The star indicates the highest score and the winner clustering. 
 
  
For brevity, let C∗(dir) denote Cd∗ 
dir as the winning clustering  Fig. 5.  Pairwise lag magnitude networks and individual average mag- 
that will be used for direction prediction. For any given cluster 
pair C, C′ ∈ C∗(dir), directionality in testing outbreak is pre - 
dicted using training outbreaks. If mCC′ 
for the past outbreaks is 
negative, we predict that C will precede C′ in the future outbreak 
nitude heatmaps. Edge thickness in the graph is inversely proportional 
to the lag magnitude. 
and vice versa. 
Fig. 3 shows an example of how lag moment (mCC′ 
from (17) 
CC′ CC′ 
o=7 C, C′ ∈ Cf :DTW, C /= C′ (22) 
and optimal lag (lCC′ 
from (13) are calculated for one outbreak 
and one cluster pair. 
Then, the reported magnitude accuracy is the root mean squared 
error (RMSE): 
 
IV. RESULTS 
Computations were performed on a machine with 2.4 GHz 
Accuracymag = 
s 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
′ f :DTW 
5 
C/=C′ 
 
ZCC′ 
— Zˆ CC ′
 2 
(23) 
processor and 8 GB memory. Seven outbreaks were isolated The RMSE for Cf :DTW is 3.16 days. Out of the total
 5 
= 10 
2015, and two in 2016) for each of the 30 selected hospitals. The 
daily flu-positive proportion of ED visits was extracted from the 
SQL database and imported into R as a time series object for 
each hospital during each outbreak. From a public health point 
of view, to represent at least the five population-dense regions in 
Ontario (southern Ontario, Kingston, Sudbury, Thunder Bay, 
cluster pairs, we are able to predict the magnitude for 7 of 10 
cluster pairs within 1 d (Fig. 5(a) and (c)). 
In addition to the pairwise magnitude, we examined the over- 
all average magnitude for each cluster to identify the clusters 
that are generally within a short temporal distance of the other 
clusters. For each clustering C, 
and Rainy River), the set of acceptable values for the total  1  Σ CC′ 
 
f :DTW 
number of clusters is set to N = {5,...,  30}. 
Once the cluster-aggregated time series are extracted, for each 
clustering, the direction and magnitude scores are calculated 
l(C) =  
5 — 1 
 
 
C′ ∈Cf :DTW 
C′/=C 
lo C ∈ C5 (24) 
using (18) and (14), respectively. For the direction score, spatial 
clustering with seven clusters had the highest score ( C∗(dir) = 
C£ ), and for the magnitude score, DTW temporal clustering with 
five clusters had the highest score C∗(mag) = Cf :DTW (Fig. 4). 
We now analyze each of the two surveillance variables (direction 
and magnitude) by using its respective winning clustering for 
aggregation. 
 
A. Magnitude 
Consider the winning magnitude clustering C∗(mag), that is, 
the DTW temporal clustering with five clusters. For each clus- 
ter pair C, C′ ∈ Cf :DTW, we compare the predicted magnitude ˆCC′ 
with the actual magnitude 
indicates how closely cluster C is connected to the other clusters 
in terms of the lag magnitude. Fig. 5(b) and (d) show the five 
clusters of Cf :DTW, and their predicted and actual overall lag 
magnitude. Dark regions indicate regions with small l(C) and 
are expected to be more closely connected to other regions than 
the lighter regions that have large l(C). 
 
B. Direction 
Consider the winning direction clustering C∗(dir), that is, 
the spatial clustering with seven clusters. For each cluster pair 
C, C′ ∈ C£ , we compare the predicted direction Yˆ CC ′ 
based on 
the first six outbreaks with the actual direction for the seventh outbreak Y CC′ 
: 
based on the first six outbreaks Z 
from the seventh outbreak ZCC′ 
: 
6 Yˆ CC′ = 
(    
|O| 
 
6 
o=1 
 
mCC′ 
< 0  
C, C′ ∈ C£ ,C  /= C′ 
ZˆCC ′ = 1 Σ 
lCC′ 
 
C, C′ ∈ C£ ,  C /= C′ (21) 0  otherwise 
 
 
2 
o=1 (25) 
7 
from 2012-2016 (two in 2012, one in each year from 2013 to 
KAMRAN et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL CLUSTERING OF MULTI-LOCATION TIME SERIES TO MODEL SEASONAL INFLUENZA SPREAD 2145 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Ajeenkya DY Patil School of Engineering. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 09:35:15 UTC f rom IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 
 
 
7 
 7  
C,
Σ
C ∈C 
5 
5 
Σ 
m 
7 
7 
7 
7 
(
1  if mCC′ 
< 0 
2 7 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Fig. 6. Pairwise lag direction moments and cluster-wise heatmap. 
Thickness in the network indicates magnitude of moment for each pair. 
 
 
Y CC′ = o=7 
0  otherwise C, C′ ∈ C£ ,C  /= C′ 
(26) 
Fig. 7.  Direction and magnitude accuracies for spatial and temporal 
clusterings. The filled circles indicate the hits (same-sign moments and 
within 1 d lag magnitudes), and empty circles the misses. 
Then, the reported direction accuracy indicates the proportion 
of the cluster pairs for which the predicted direction matches the 
actual direction: 
 
the same size predicts the correct direction for only 71% of 
the cluster pairs. On the other hand, while the RMSE for the 
Accuracy dir = 1 —  1  
2 
 
 
 
′  £ 
7 
C/=C′ 
 
Y CC′ 
— Yˆ CC ′ 2 
(27) magnitude winner Cf :DTW is 3.16 days, and it predicts the lag 
magnitude within 1 d of the actual value for 70% of the cluster 
pairs, the spatial C£ achieves an RMSE of 5.84 days, being able to predict the actual lag magnitude within 1 d for only 20% of 
Out of the total
 7 
= 21 cluster pairs in  CS, we were able to 
correctly predict the direction for 17 cluster pairs, achieving a 
direction accuracy of 81% (Fig. 6(a) and (c)). 
In addition to the pairwise directionalities, we examined the 
overall outgoing (incoming if positive) moment for each cluster 
to identify the clusters that generally lead (follow) the other 
clusters. For each clustering C, 
 
 
V. DISCUSSION 
Spread patterns of influenza are studied in the literature on 
scales ranging from wearable sensors and contact diaries in a 
high school [48] to work commute patterns in cities [49] and 
even global transmission patterns that were studied on both the   1  m(C) =  
7 — 1 
CC′ 
o 
C′∈C£ 
C′/=C 
C ∈ C£ (28) pathogen and the host sides [50], [51], [52]. These approaches, 
however, assume an underlying model a priori to accommodate 
preconceived notions in the assumptions of spread models. 
indicates how likely the cluster C is to be a leader or a follower 
in the future outbreaks and is used to create a heatmap.Fig. 6(b) 
and (d) show the seven regions of CS, and the predicted and 
actual direction heatmap for those regions. Dark regions in 
the heatmap (e.g., Kingston and Toronto) indicate regions with 
negative m(C) and are therefore expected to lead, while light 
regions (e.g., Manitouwadge) indicate regions with positive 
m(C) and are expected to follow. Also, note that the larger the 
absolute value of the moment is, the stronger directionality can 
be inferred. 
To put the reported accuracies into perspective for comparison 
of spatial and temporal clusterings for public policymaking, we 
compared magnitude and direction accuracies for each of the winning clusterings C£ and Cf :DTW with clusterings of the same 
However, those preconceived notions of transmission, although 
heavily relied upon in the literature, are not always right. For 
example, contrary to the widely-accepted notion that influenza 
epidemics depends on the climatic variables [53], [54], [55], 
there is recent evidence [56] for cities with vast intercontinental 
climactic variations and more than 3,000 km of geographical 
distance that exhibit significant synchronicity in terms of the 
onset of epidemics. 
Extensions of the SIR model have also been proposed to 
consider spatio-temporal data [57]; however, each country has 
their own SIR coefficients. Therefore, the temporal aspect is only 
in the temporal differentials of the SIR system with country - 
specific parameters. None of the above papers aggregate data based on temporal distances. 
7 5 
size but with the other distance measure (Fig. 7). We also found evidence for rapid transmission in non- 
The direction winner C£ predicts the correct direction for populous regions like Rainy River and Thunder Bay [58], 
81% of the cluster pairs, while the best temporal clustering with contrary to the paradigm that influenza spreads more rapidly 
the cluster pairs. 
2146 IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2023 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Ajeenkya DY Patil School of Engineering. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 09:35:15 UTC f rom IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 
 
 
 
between more populous areas [59]. Our model requires no prior 
assumptions on spread patterns or other complex covariates (e.g., 
bird migration patterns [60]) or weather [61], and instead finds 
recurrent inter-regional patterns directly from the historical data. 
By virtue of ignoring the preconceived notions on the spread 
patterns, then, our method is immune to the complexities of the 
underlying structure and is suitable for the analysis of overly 
complicated systems with limited historical data for training. 
By focusing on the surveillance objectives as early as the ag- 
gregation stage, our model allows for the extraction of actionable 
insights for health system response. We showed that geograph- 
ical clustering is more suitable than temporal for predicting the 
spatial direction of the flu transmission. Although pairs such  
as Toronto and Ottawa, both population -dense regions [58], 
have a small directionality between them (i.e., the outbreak 
equally likely went either way in the past) some region pairs 
such as Kingston to Wawa and Manitouwadge exhibit a strong 
directionalities, which is consistent with previous findings [62] 
that influenza tends to start in the larger cities and then spread 
to the smaller ones. 
Other than spatial closeness, work commute and air traffic 
have also been connected to spread of influenza [63]. We found 
that temporal aggregation provided more accurate predictions 
for the pairwise temporal distances, that are the lag magnitudes. 
Our findings that outbreaks take between three to seven days 
to travel between pairs of Ontario hospital clusters is consistent 
with previous findings [64] that influenza takes about a week 
to travel between the metropolitan areas and the smaller cities. 
Once a metropolitan cluster faces an outbreak, remote clusters 
can receive an advanced notice and incorporate our pairwise lag 
magnitudes into their planning horizons. 
Our findings indicate that regions such as Rainy River and 
Thunder Bay, albeit not populous, are tightly connected to other 
regions. This observation is in contrast with the paradigm that 
influenza is marked by rapid spread between populous centers 
followed by subsequent spread to less populated areas [59], 
and suggests that there must be other factors than population to 
determine the rapidness of transmission between regions. It is 
worth mentioning that the dark regions in the magnitude heatmap 
(Fig. 5) often have a major airport near them (Toronto, Ottawa, 
and Thunder Bay all have international airports), while there  
is no major airport near the light regions like Manitouwadge. 
Although further analysis is required before drawing the con - 
clusion that airports cause a faster flu travel between regions, 
there are studies that link transmission dynamics to air travel 
patterns [65], [66]. 
From a public health applicability point of view, this anal - 
ysis allows policymakers to create advance alarms to certain 
regions based on the current situation. For example, when an 
outbreak starts in Toronto, hospitals in Manitouwadge may be 
warned about expecting an increase in flu -related emergency 
visits and plan to allocate their resources accordingly. Although 
we showed quantitative improvement in the accuracy of mag - 
nitude prediction by introducing a temporal aggregagtion, the 
direct impact may not necessarily be obtained through earlier 
or more accurate prediction of the outbreaks, but rather through 
novel insights such as the quantitative demonstration that major 
airports are flu hubs. In terms of prediction accuracy, a tempo- 
ral aggregation proved more accurate than spatial aggregation 
in predicting the magnitude of spread. The improved accu - 
racy may be capitalized in resource management such as bed 
planning. 
Our spatio -temporal model may improve studies of other 
infectious diseases, as well as other health informatics problems 
where spatio-temporal patterns are important. Examples include 
applications in mapping brain activity, biosensors, health mon- 
itoring systems, and public health surveillance. 
Our work has two limitations that may be addressed through 
further research: The first limitation is that it does not provide an 
explicit learning mechanism in terms of maximum likelihood. 
A Bayesian extension may provide the capability to learn causal 
structures from conditional distributions and identify disease 
hubs that may cause outbreaks in other regions. 
The second limitation is that, due to data availability, our 
dataset is small given the scope of infectious disease spread and 
our focus on a single Canadian province. A more comprehensive 
dataset with longer history and bigger geographic areas contain- 
ing more major airports could provide further validation of our 
findings. Further insights could be gained through the incorpo- 
ration of relevant external factors, e.g., weather (as influenza 
viruses are more stable in the cold [67]) and bird migrations (as 
influenza can be carried by birds, e.g., H5N1 avian flu [60]), as 
well as examination of various other influenza subtypes and the 
impact of flu vaccinations. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
We showed that the spatial direction and temporal magnitude 
of flu travel between clusters of hospitals can be predicted 
using historical data. Exploiting the spatial and the temporal 
similarities of spatio-temporally recorded data can each be more 
useful than the other depending on the variable being studied. 
The methodologies presented here may improve the analysis of 
other problems where a set of time series are recorded from 
multiple related locations. 
Our current analysis does not distinguish between flu virus 
types A and B. However, based on their genetic properties they 
may exhibit different outbreak behaviours. A possible future 
direction for this work is to obtain laboratory results on the types 
of circulating virus and differentiate between outbreaks with 
different types of dominant viral strains. For example, influenza 
type A that goes through antigenic shifts may cause a new strain 
against which the population has no immunity, resulting in a 
pandemic that rapidly effects large population with significant 
health system impact. 
FluWatch reports by PHAC in Canada [12] during the past 
five years suggest that a type A outbreak usually precedes a type 
B outbreak and has a larger magnitude. Confirmed laboratory 
results may enable quantitative verification of these hypotheses. 
Additionally, future research can differentiate between out- 
breaks happening at different times of the year. Seasonality of 
transmission rates is known to have a significant influence on 
the temporal patterns of epidemics of infectious diseases [68]. 
An outbreak peaking during holiday travel periods may be 
KAMRAN et al.: SPATIO-TEMPORAL CLUSTERING OF MULTI-LOCATION TIME SERIES TO MODEL SEASONAL INFLUENZA SPREAD 2147 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Ajeenkya DY Patil School of Engineering. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 09:35:15 UTC f rom IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 
 
 
 
faster transmitted between airport-connected cities, while it may 
be more slowly spread into work places due to the holiday 
closures. The detection of pandemic behaviour may then be 
turned into action-based prediction of impact to plan for effective 
containment. For example, knowing the importance of regions 
with major airports, the policymakers could have prioritized first 
containment and then tracking efforts in those regions; or even 
planned for bed capacities more efficiently, knowing how long 
the peaks take to travel betweeen regions. 
Finally, similar analysis can be repeated for COVID -19 to 
determine if emerging global pandemics share the same spread 
properties as seasonal influenza when applied to specific regions, 
i.e., a state or province, or even an entire country with enough 
participating hospitals providing both historical flu and current 
pandemic data. 
By analyzing data from only one province, we found an 
interesting potential player: the major airports. The analysis  
of global pandemics like COVID -19 can verify the role of the 
airports [69], [70], and potentially reveal even more interesting 
urban patterns (R2C2), such as the role of big cities, tourist 
attractions, and financial hubs [71], [72]. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Hootan Kamran would like to thank Bahman Radjabalipour 
for helping with the project’s database. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] World Health Organization, “Global influenza programme,” 2015, Ac - 
cessed: 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/influenza/en/ 
[2] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Leading causes of death,”  
2013, Accessed: 2021. [Online]. Available: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ 
fastats/leading-causes-of-death.htm 
[3] Statistics Canada, “The 10 leading causes of death, 2011,” 2011, Ac- 
cessed: 2021. [Online]. Available: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-625- 
x/2014001/article/11896-eng.htm 
[4] Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, “Ontario burden of infectious  
disease study,” 2010. 
[5] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Types of influenza viruses,” 
2013, Accessed: 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/ 
viruses/types.htm 
[6] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “CDC seasonal flu vaccine  
effectiveness studies,” 2021, Accessed: 2021. [Online]. Available: https: 
//www.cdc.gov/flu/vaccines-work/effectiveness-studies.htm 
[7] P. Cirillo and N. N. Taleb, “Tail risk of contagious diseases,” Nature Phys., 
vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 606–613, 2020. 
[8] H. Minkowski, “Space and time, lecture given at the 80th meeting of natural 
scientists in Cologne, Germany,” 1908. 
[9] R. A. Jajosky and S. L. Groseclose, “Evaluation of reporting timeliness of 
public health surveillance systems for infectious diseases,” BMC Public 
Health, vol. 4, no. 1, 2004, Art. no. 29. 
[10] A.-J . Valleron et al., “A computer network for the surveillance of commu- 
nicable diseases: The French experiment,” Amer. J. Public Health, vol. 76, 
no. 11, pp. 1289–1292, 1986. 
[11] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “FluView,” 2013, Accessed: 
2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/ 
[12] Public Health Agency of Canada, “FluWatch,” 2022. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/fluwatch/ 
[13] KFL&A, “ILIMapper,” 2018, Accessed: 2018. [Online]. Available: http: 
//mapper.kflaphi.ca/ilimapper/ 
[14] X. Zhou et al., “A spatial-temporal method to detect global influenza epi- 
demics using heterogeneous data collected from the internet,” IEEE/ACM 
Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinf., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 802–812, May/Jun. 2018. 
[15] D. M. Cornforth, T. C. Reluga, E. Shim, C. T. Bauch, A. P. Galvani,  
and L. A. Meyers, “Erratic flu vaccination emerges from short-sighted 
behavior in contact networks,” PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 7, no. 1, 2011,  
Art. no. e1001062. 
[16] G. Bindea et al., “Spatiotemporal dynamics of intratumoral immune cells 
reveal the immune landscape in human cancer,” Immunity, vol. 39, no. 4, 
pp. 782–795, 2013. 
[17] A. Diehl et al., “Visual analysis of spatio -temporal data: Applications in 
weather forecasting,” in Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 34. Hoboken, NJ, 
USA: Wiley, 2015, pp. 381–390. 
[18] T. Higham et al., “The timing and spatiotemporal patterning of neanderthal 
disappearance,” Nature, vol. 512, no. 7514, pp. 306–309, 2014. 
[19] B. Y. Reis and K. D. Mandl, “Time series modeling for syndromic surveil- 
lance,” BMC Med. Informat. Decis. Mak., vol. 3, no. 1, 2003, Art. no. 2. 
[20] L. Ngo, I. B. Tager, and D. Hadley, “Application of exponential smoothing 
for nosocomial infection surveillance,” Amer. J. Epidemiol., vol. 143, no. 6, 
pp. 637–647, 1996. 
[21] S. Unkel, C. Farrington, P. Garthwaite, C. Robertson, and N. Andrews,  
“Statistical methods for the prospective detection of infectious disease  
outbreaks: A review,” J. Roy. Stat. Soc.: Ser. A, vol. 175, no. 1, pp. 49–82, 
2012. 
[22] W. A. Shewhart, Economic Control of Quality of Manufactured Product. 
New York, NY, USA: D. Van Nostrand Company, Incorporated, 1931. 
[23] P. A. Rogerson, “Monitoring point patterns for the development of space– 
time clusters,” J. Roy. Stat. Soc.: Ser. A, vol. 164, no. 1, pp. 87–96, 2001. 
[24] C.-J. Lin, K. -L. Tsui, and C. -Y. Lin, “A spatial -EWMA framework for 
detecting clustering,” Qual. Rel. Eng. Int. , vol. 30, no. 2, pp.  181–189, 
2014. 
[25] S. K. Greene, E. R. Peterson, D. Kapell, A. D. Fine, and M. Kulldorff,  
“Daily reportable disease spatiotemporal cluster detection, New York  
City, New York, USA, 2014–2015,” Emerg. Infect. Dis., vol. 22, no. 10, 
pp. 1808–1812,2016. 
[26] Y. L. Strat and F. Carrat, “Monitoring epidemiologic surveillance data us- 
ing hidden Markov models,” Statist. Med., vol. 18, no. 24, pp. 3463–3478, 
1999. 
[27] D. Conesa, M. Martínez -Beneito, R. Amorós, and A. López -Quílez, 
“Bayesian hierarchical poisson models with a hidden Markov structure  
for the detection of influenza epidemic outbreaks,” Stat. Methods Med. 
Res., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 206–223, 2015. 
[28] M. Frisén, “Principles for multivariate surveillance,” Front. Stat. Qual.  
Control, vol. 9, pp. 133–144, 2010. 
[29] G. Gan, C. Ma, and J. Wu, Data Clustering: Theory, Algorithms, and  
Applications, vol. 20. Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2007. 
[30] R. Amorós, D. Conesa, A. López -Quílez, and M. -A. Martinez-Beneito, 
“A spatio-temporal hierarchical Markov switching model for the early de- 
tection of influenza outbreaks,” Stochastic Environ. Res. Risk Assessment, 
vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 275–292, 2020. 
[31] M. A. Martinez-Beneito, P. Botella-Rocamora, and O. Zurriaga, “A kernel- 
based spatio-temporal surveillance system for monitoring influenza -like 
illness incidence,” Stat. Methods Med. Res., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 103–118, 
2011. 
[32] X. Wang, A. Mueen, H. Ding, G. Trajcevski, P. Scheuermann, and E.  
Keogh, “Experimental comparison of representation methods and distance 
measures for time series data,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 26, 
pp. 275–309, 2013. 
[33] H. A. Carneiro and E. Mylonakis, “Google trends: A web -based tool for 
real-time surveillance of disease outbreaks,” Clin. Infect. Dis. , vol. 49,  
no. 10, pp. 1557–1564, 2009. 
[34] H. Achrekar, A. Gandhe, R. Lazarus, S. -H. Yu, and B. Liu, “Predicting  
flu trends using twitter data,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.  
Workshops, 2011, pp. 702–707. 
[35] K. Lee, A. Agrawal, and A. Choudhary, “Real -time disease surveillance 
using twitter data: Demonstration on flu and cancer,” in Proc. 19th ACM 
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2013, pp. 1474–1477. 
[36] D. Butler, “When Google got flu wrong,” Nature, vol. 494, no. 7436, 
pp. 155–156, 2013. 
[37] World Health Organization, A Manual for Estimating Disease Burden  
Associated With Seasonal Influenza. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization, 2015. 
[38] Public Health Agency of Canada, “Fluwatch program,” 2015. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/fluwatch/ 
[39] H.-M. Lu, D. Zeng, L. Trujillo, K. Komatsu, and H. Chen, “Ontology - 
enhanced automatic chief complaint classification for syndromic surveil- 
lance,” J. Biomed. Informat., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 340–356, 2008. 
[40] Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians, “Prehospital Canadian  
triage and acuity scale,” 2016, Accessed: 2018. [Online]. Available: http: 
//caep.ca/resources/ctas 
2148 IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH INFORMATICS, VOL. 27, NO. 4, APRIL 2023 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Ajeenkya DY Patil School of Engineering. Downloaded on December 04,2025 at 09:35:15 UTC f rom IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 
 
 
 
[41] N. Marsden-Haug, V. B. Foster, P. L. Gould, E. Elbert, H. Wang, and J. 
A. Pavlin, “Code-based syndromic surveillance for influenzalike illness  
by international classification of diseases, ninth revision,” Emerg. Infect. 
Dis., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 207–216, 2007. 
[42] X. Zhu and D. Guo, “Mapping large spatial flow data with hierarchical  
clustering,” Trans. GIS, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 421–435, 2014. 
[43] F. Zhou, F. De la Torre, and J. K. Hodgins, “Hierarchical aligned cluster 
analysis for temporal clustering of human motion,” IEEE Trans. Pattern 
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 582–596, Mar. 2013. 
[44] P. Montero and J. A. Vilar, “TSclust: An R package for time series  
clustering,” J. Stat. Softw., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 1–43, 2014. 
[45] X. Golay, S. Kollias, G. Stoll, D. Meier, A. Valavanis, and P. Boesiger, “A 
new correlation-based fuzzy logic clustering algorithm for FMRI,” Magn. 
Reson. Med., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 249–260, 1998. 
[46] T. Giorgino et al., “Computing and visualizing dynamic time warping  
alignments in R: The DTW package,” J. Stat. Softw., vol. 31, no. 7, 
pp. 1–24, 2009. 
[47] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “The flu season,” 2017, Ac- 
cessed: 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/season/ 
flu-season.htm 
[48] R. Mastrandrea, J. Fournet, and A. Barrat, “Contact patterns in a high  
school: A comparison between data collected using wearable sensors,  
contact diaries and friendship surveys,” PLoS One, vol. 10, no. 9, 2015,  
Art. no. e0136497. 
[49] B. A. Bozick and L. A. Real, “The role of human transportation networks in 
mediating the genetic structure of seasonal influenza in the United States,” 
PLoS Pathogens, vol. 11, no. 6, 2015, Art. no. e1004898. 
[50] T. Bedford et al., “Global circulation patterns of seasonal influenza viruses 
vary with antigenic drift,” Nature, vol. 523, no. 7559, pp.  217–220, 
2015. 
[51] E. Kenah, D. L. Chao, L. Matrajt, M. E. Halloran, and I. M. Longini Jr,  
“The global transmission and control of influenza,” PLoS One, vol. 6, no. 5, 
2011, Art. no. e19515. 
[52] P. Lemey et al., “Unifying viral genetics and human transportation data  
to predict the global transmission dynamics of human influenza H3N2,”  
PLoS Pathogens, vol. 10, no. 2, 2014, Art. no. e1003932. 
[53] Z. P. Ross et al., “Inter -seasonal influenza is characterized by extended  
virus transmission and persistence,” PLoS Pathogens, vol. 11, no. 6, 2015, 
Art. no. e1004991. 
[54] E. Azziz Baumgartner et al., “Seasonality, timing, and climate drivers of 
influenza activity worldwide,” J. Infect. Dis., vol. 206, no. 6, pp. 838–846, 
2012. 
[55] C. Viboud et al., “Association of influenza epidemics with global cli - 
mate variability,” Eur. J. Epidemiol. , vol. 19, no. 11, pp.  1055–1059, 
2004. 
[56] J. L. Geoghegan, A. F. Saavedra, S. Duchêne, S. Sullivan, I. Barr, and 
E. C. Holmes, “Continental synchronicity of human influenza virus epi - 
demics despite climactic variation,” PLoS Pathogens, vol. 14, no. 1, 2018, 
Art. no. e1006780. 
 
 
 
 
 
[57] D. He, R. Lui, L. Wang, C. K. Tse, L. Yang, and L. Stone, “Global spatio- 
temporal patterns of influenza in the post-pandemic era,” Sci. Rep., vol. 5, 
no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2015. 
[58] Statistics Canada, “Canada census,” 2011, Accessed: 2018. [Online].  
Available: http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2011/as-sa/ 
fogs-spg/Facts-csd-eng.cfm?Lang=eng&GK=CSD&GC=3520005 
[59] C. Viboud, O. N. Bjørnstad, D. L. Smith, L. Simonsen, M. A. Miller, and 
B. T. Grenfell, “Synchrony, waves, and spatial hierarchies in the spread of 
influenza,” Science, vol. 312, no. 5772, pp. 447–451, 2006. 
[60] H. Tian et al., “Avian influenza H5N1 viral and bird migration networks 
in Asia,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 112, no. 1, pp. 172–177, 2015. 
[61] F. A. Saad and V. K. Mansinghka, “A Bayesian nonparametric method for 
clustering imputation, and forecasting in multivariate time series,” 2017, 
arXiv:1710.06900. 
[62] L. Schiöler, “Characterisation of influenza outbreaks in Sweden,” Scand. 
J. Social Med., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 427–436, 2011. 
[63] V. Charu et al., “Human mobility and the spatial transmission of in - 
fluenza in the United States,” PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 13, no. 2, 2017,  
Art. no. e1005382. 
[64] M. Frisén, “Spatial outbreak detection based on inference principles for  
multivariate surveillance,” IIE Trans., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 759–769, 2014. 
[65] D. Brockmann and D. Helbing, “The hidden geometry of complex,  
network-driven contagion phenomena,” Science, vol. 342, no. 6164, 
pp. 1337–1342, 2013. 
[66] R. F. Grais, J. H. Ellis, and G. E. Glass, “Assessing the impact of airline  
travel on the geographic spread of pandemic influenza,” Eur. J. Epidemiol., 
vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 1065–1072, 2003. 
[67] A. C. Lowen and J. Steel, “Roles of humidity and temperature in shap - 
ing influenza seasonality,” J. Virol. , vol. 88, no. 14, pp.  7692–7695, 
2014. 
[68] R. M. Anderson, R. M. May, and B. Anderson, Infectious Diseases of  
Humans: Dynamics and Control, vol. 28. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 1992. 
[69] S. P. Ribeiro et al., “Severe airport sanitarian control could slow down  
the spreading of COVID -19 pandemics in Brazil,” PeerJ, vol. 8, 2020,  
Art. no. e9446. 
[70] M. Norizuki et al., “Effective screening strategies for detection of  
asymptomatic COVID -19 travelers at airport quarantine stations: Ex - 
ploratory findings in Japan,” Glob. Health Med. , vol. 3, pp.  107–111, 
2021. 
[71] A. Sahasranaman and H. J. Jensen, “Spread of COVID -19 in urban  
neighbourhoods and slums of the developing world,” J. Roy. Soc. Interface, 
vol. 18, no. 174, 2021, Art. no. 20200599. 
[72] A. Sharifi and A. R. Khavarian -Garmsir, “The COVID -19 pandemic:  
Impacts on cities and major lessons for urban planning, design, and  
management,” Sci. Total Environ., vol. 749, 2020, Art. no. 142391. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

